# Week 11: Transactions
GSI: Vikram Sreekanti

---

## **Transactions** are a sequence of reads and writes of database objects that must commit or abort as an atomic unit.

---

### In a database, we want to maintain the following properties:

# **A**tomicity

# **C**onsistency

# **I**solation

# **D**urability

---

## **A**tomicity
Executes all actions in a transaction or none of them.

---

## **D**urability
Effects of committed transactions must survive failures.

---

## **C**onsistency
Preserve integrity constraints

---

## **I**solation
Concurrent accesses have no effect on a transaction behavior and the net effect must be identical to executing all transactions in some serial order.

---

# **Conflict Serializable Schedules** <small>(Isolation)</small>
A subset of all schedules that are *conflict equivalent*.

---

### **Conflict equivalent** schedules involve same actions of the same transactions, and every pair of conflicting actions is ordered the same way.

---

### **Conflicting actions** are actions that

1. #### are from different transactions
2. #### are on the same object
3. #### contain at least one write

---

### A schedule is **conflict serializable** if it is conflict equivalent to some _serial schedule_.

---

### A schedule is conflict serializable iff its dependency graph is acyclic.

- #### One node per transaction
- #### edge from T_i to T_j
    - if operation in T_i conflicts with an operation in T_j.
    - if the operation in T_i appears earlier in the schedule than the operation in T_j

---

### All this definition stuff is just **to identify** a conflict serializable schedule.

---

### We haven't said anything about **how** to go about building one of these schedules.

---

# **Locking**

This is how we're going to get a conflict serializable schedule with a locking manager.

---

# One method: **2 Phase Locking (2-PL)**

- #### transaction must obtain a "S" (shared) lock before reading
- #### transaction must obtain an "X" (exclusive) lock before writing
- #### transaction can not get a new lock after releasing any locks

It's cool but doesn't prevent cascading aborts. (See lecture)

---

## Another method: **Strict 2 Phase Locking**

- #### Same as 2-PL ... but
- #### Release locks only when transaction commits or aborts (finishes)

---

- #### Prevents cascading aborts
- #### Produces conflict serializable schedules

---

## But doesn't prevent deadlocks.

See lecture on how to resolve these (prevention versus avoidance).
